Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture by the end of it.
You'll be able to use a very straightforward animation like the one you can see in front of you here
where we've got a few solid colours coming up on the screen and looping round in a circle.
I happen to have called this one sunrise.
So as you can see it's emulating the sun coming up and setting again to night time.
Okay so welcome back over into guimpe in this particular lecture.
We're going to discuss the animation principles how to get a basic switching of colours going on over
in guimpe.
So the first thing of course we need is an image which we're going to use as one of our frames.
So let's go ahead and create a new image.
And at this point in time I am ordered to make it eight by eight.
I don't want to deal with a huge canvas or anything else.
No zoom in so I can have a closer look at that and I'm going to make it a solid colour so going to go
to my bucket all an under and to fill it in case of that's done dusted.
Now how do we switch to a new frame.
Is it a new image and how does it working gimp.
Well in GIMP providing you have your first layer set up that acts as frame number one.
If we go ahead and create a new layer that will act as frain two and I'm actually going to name this
frame.
So and the original one frame one.
So I know which one they are.
Now of course this does present problems if you decide to name like this if you go ahead and say No
I don't want frame one to be the first frame but I want frame two.
So you do have the bear in mind that if you go and juggle them like that that may cause you a few issues
but even frame one in frame two just so I know that the order starts at the bottom and goes up from
there.
So frame one frame to frame three frame four et cetera et cetera.
So frame two let's give that a colour as well as go for blue or green or something.
So making sure frame two is selected to use the fill tool and fill that in.
So now we have two layers active.
Now there is going to be an issue with working 8 by 8.
That is that the preview were about to experience is going to be tiny.
So I'll show you that and then we'll go back we'll scale it up.
So if we go down to filters and go down to animation on the file menu there we've got a series of options.
And all we're focussed on at the moment is playback.
So if we go ahead and click on playback a new window appears and it looks like there's not much in there
but this is the setup we saw earlier with the bouncing ball.
I can go ahead and click play and I can see alternating between frame one down at the bottom and frame
two.
Now is not getting the names of those it's literally just frame one and two and I've happened to name
them the same thing.
And this is your preview this tiny little square underneath the rewind and this is where you may come
across a few issues when youre working with such small images.
So Im just going to close that go to my image before I do anything else.
Im going to save this so save save it in the appropriate place to whatever youre working in.
So there we go.
Im just saving my project there and now I can go to image and scale my image to something a bit larger.
In this case Im going to go all the work to 512 so its nice and large for us to see.
And then you shift control in Jay just to make it full screen.
And we will be alternating between needs if we go to filter's animation and playback.
We finally can see it as it is and I'm going to stop that before it hurts my eyes.
Now you can play with a few things.
You can detach this area.
This is the image that you're playing back and can to reattach it by clicking on detach again and then
down at the bottom.
You can change the speed of the playback as well as how many frames per second it is.
And it seems here that it tops out 72 frames per second.
Fair enough.
Uncommonly of course with the level of fidelity we're working with we're going to be around 10 or 12.
And if you decide to work higher that's all very well but do bear in mind is often going to take a lot
more work to actually get a decent animation at 60 frames per second opposed to 10.
In fact I'd say take around six times more work.
Okay.
So we've created our animation here and we're ready to show the world.
Of course you could taps your screen but that's no good really to say this as something that we can
use and demonstrate to other people.
Now we're not quite at the stage at the moment where we'd want to create this into a sprite sheet or
anything else.
We just want to share it and we can share it as an animated gif.
And of course like everything we can't just go file and save with it.
We need to go to exports and I'm going to go down to export as and I'm going to call this my name that
I've currently got it and I'm going to change the extension at the end to G I F.
Now some people call this a gif.
Some people called it a jiff.
I've always called a gif and I will continue doing so unless I'm corrected now.
All exported images.
I'm going to leave that as that's absolutely fine.
But the fact I've typed in G G F on the end it will automatically switch to a gif file.
If I then go in hit export it's going to give me some options and there is an important option here
and that is as animation.
We need to make sure that is ticked otherwise we won't get an animation.
We do want it to loop forever and this is the important one that I'm going to change that oscillation
that we had before between the black and the green was far too quick.
So I'm going to delay the time between the frames where unspecified.
We haven't specified any frame times here so we can go in here and change this from 100 milliseconds
which is 10 times a second.
A millisecond is a thousandth of a second so there's a thousand of them would be.
So I typed in 1000 here.
It would switch between black and green every second I want it to be a little quick of a map every half
second so I'm going to go for 500 milliseconds and click on export.
Now once I've done that I'll be able to go to my file directory and find my export.
Here it is black and green.
When I open it up I can see that every half second it goes to Green which is great on this black screen
that I have here and of course now we've done the basics of changing those out.
I'd like you to solidify that knowledge now in the form of a challenge.
And your challenge for this lecture is going to be to create a short animation that cycles through at
least six different solid colours.
And here is an example of that happening here.
So as an extension of what you've just done so go ahead.
Post a video and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and create an extended version of what we currently have.
Okay so we're back over in gimping.
I want to revert back to its smaller version before I do anything else.
So I'm going to go to a file and open recent.
And I can open up my black green again not the gif but the one underneath it.
And there we go back in.
Now this could be confusing because now I've got two of exactly the same file open.
I'm going to close and discard the other one and zoom all the way in so I can see what's happening so
I've got two frames coming up there.
That's fine.
The start a frame one the bottom one and go up and create a new layer and then.
It's tempting to call it frame 3 and so forth.
I'm just going to go and create a couple of layers here.
So how many did I say in the challenge I said at least.
Six.
So let's go ahead and go a couple more and go to frame 67 why not add that in there for confusion and
everybody.
But there we go.
Let's go up to.
So with frame three selected I'm going to fill it in for selected fill that in frame five selected.
I can fill that in and so forth and so forth.
Now obviously you could go through these in a more predictable manner maybe and go through colours in
a changing fashion maybe red orange yellow green blue etc. It's a fading down.
In fact you know what I'm going to do that I'm going to go to my palates.
Let's make this a bit more interesting than just random stuff.
Have we got the fire code that will probably be all I need.
Or plasma.
Again this is a great thing about palettes.
I'm going to pick plasma.
No let's go to fire code again.
Well it's helped so that's got everything I want and I will call this sunrise because we're going to
go from black and then we go to a deep red.
Oh no it's kind of a blue first isn't it.
There's the blue and then deep red on the next frame and then slightly warmer red.
And of course if you have the inclination in time you could do this for hundreds of frames and fill
in one for every single colour that is there.
If you wanted to just finish this off now as we come up that's a much better sequence of colours.
We're going to go ahead and this time go save has because that's not black and green anymore at all
save it as that.
But I'm going to call it sunrise.
Now of course what I could do here is then repeat frame eight and go seven six five four duplicating
them and moving them to the appropriate location.
Now I'd have a sunset and sunrise.
Shall I do that.
Yeah let's do that.
So we're at yellow here so I can duplicate a couple of times so it stays at yellow for a bit and then
do the darker yellow lift that up to the top.
Do the.
Frame six duplicate that lift up to the top.
And carry on doing this into life got them all.
And there we go.
So this is now going to go from black to yellow and back to black again.
I hope after doing all of that do you.
Bear in mind at this point in time that we are still eight by eight Some are going to go ahead and save
my far before I make any other ulcerations let me go to my image and scale the image of going to turn
up again to 512.
And once that scaled up I'm going to make sure there's no interpolation although they're solid colours
that shouldn't make any difference in this case.
Now we're going to get the filters animation and just play that back and test this clip play.
There we go.
Really.
So we go we've got it fading and fading down again.
Perfect.
Let's go ahead now and export that someone export it as it's come up as a gift because it's remembered
the previous work I've done an export That's now I don't want this to take 500 milliseconds.
This is going to have to be slightly quick.
I don't need to be too quick so I'm going to go for 200 which is one fifth of a second and then I'm
going to go ahead making sure everything else is done.
I'm going to export that.
And then I will check it as well and make sure it's all working.
And of course now this is a gif.
You can actually share that very easily on social or even over on the forum.
And I'm looking forward to seeing what you've come up with over there so pleased to share your work.
And I will see you all in the next lecture.